You're Fred Wilson or Freddy?
Freddy they call me.
Where were you born?
Islington.
And when did you come down to South Wales?
I don't know the actual date, but I was four and nine months old.
So you can work it out from that roughly.
When was your birthday then?
24th of December 1935.
1935, so would it be about 1940?
Yeah, I was four and nine months old.
What were your feelings when you arrived in...
Well at that age, panic.
And I came down in a train.
We all had to go to Paddington.
Your parents came with you, and then the tears were then and everything like that.
And my first cousin was being evacuated at the same time.
So my mother said, if you're going to be to anybody's house or anything like that,
you have to stay together, two of you.
Well then we went to the Glyke school and all the kids were in there.
And then the people, the local people, were asked to take some children in.
It was like a cattle market.
And my cousin, she kept hold of me.
And I was evacuated to H.R. Jones.
Yeah, my cousin's brother.
They lived on the Glyke then, or he lived on the Glyke,
with his father-in-law, who was a miner.
So that was a bit strange as well, seeing him coming on black.
And in the end, he said, right, fair enough, we'll take two.
So my cousin and I, we both stayed with H.R. Jones.
We were separated out.
We didn't know one another anyway.
But when we were settled in with our people, we had to go to school then.
Well, there was only one classroom.
And we had one teacher, Miss Wakeman.
Funny, her name's come back now.
Yeah, Miss Wakeman.
And she taught the three rows of pupils.
You had the infants, you had the juniors, and you had the seniors.
When we all, everybody, learned about the war,
well, all the school teachers had to take all the children home to their mothers
to tell them what was happening.
And they were all told, see, that they were going to be taken down to the station
in so-and-so time and day, and they would be safe.
They're going down into Wales, near Swansea.
So I can always remember my father and mother talking about it,
what we're going to do about them.
So I had one brother, yeah, Blaise, and two sisters who were in school.
And they wanted to go because to them, it was like a picnic going in a train.
I think they didn't know what it was going to be like.
Well, anyway, it was up to them to decide.
So my parents decided to let them go.
So they came down here.
And of course, they were parted, weren't they?
My brother had a marvellous life because he was with the, you know, the new inn?
Penbank Farm.
Penbank Farm, that's right.
My brother was, he was very clever with his hands on that.
He goes up there to them and because the farmer was good,
he was riding horses in no time.
He used to go across the bank, across all the mountains from the new inn
and end up in Pontedoui on a horse.
But my two sisters were sent to Rideau-Ferot.
And she used to make my sister get up early, a couple of hours early,
to get ready to go to school, to scrub the kitchen, clean the windows or anything.
She made like a sleigh.
But my youngest sister now, Marge, she went up to Rideau-Ferot
and she was with a married couple of girls.
And there was a daughter there who was older than my sister was,
but they treated her like a daughter.
She had a wonderful time up there.
In fact, when she went back, she was always phoning them and they was phoning her, you know.
Do you remember any of the evacuees coming to you?
Yeah, well, we had an evacuee over with us.
Oh, right.
Ernie Thompson from Finsbury in London.
And he didn't stay after the war?
No, he didn't stay.
He came early in the war and London wasn't bombed for long.
The mother came down and took him home.
He had a sister as well, which was with somebody else in the grave.
And the day the mother came down and took him back,
I mean, he didn't hear anything from them since.
But there is an evacuee, and she stayed in the grave?
Well, Freddie Wilson, he was with the HR Jones.
He stayed with them.
And he didn't go back.
He was always still with them.
He's a grave boy now, isn't he?
Yeah, he talks well.
Oh, good.
So the evacuees, when they came to the school, they had to learn Welsh?
Well, we could speak English with them, like, you know, so it wasn't a problem, really.
You could talk to them because they had a bit of a problem with me.
Or do they have their own teachers?
They brought their own teachers, yes.
Well, during that time, most of them were 11-year-olds, like, you see.
And they went down to Clifdon School.
Oh, right, yes.
But they stayed in the grave, like, you know, the bus going from the grave down to school.
Every day.
Now, tell me, but you had evacuees come to the leg.
Well, they came up by bus from the railway station, I street, I believe.
And then it was dark.
It was late in the evening, you know.
And we were all waiting outside now when all the evacuees were inside now.
And we were jumping up the window to see what was happening.
We could look straight inside, you know, we were jumping up.
I could see the women going in, like, picking the evacuees.
I knew all the mothers from the village, you know.
And they were picking our boys and girls to take home, you know.
So they had teachers with them.
They brought their own teachers down.
Well, well, they mixed in with the Welsh boy.
They went, you know, they came to the Romer village school,
then they mixed with us and we played with us.
And that's how we learned the Welsh from the yard, I think.
Yeah.
Were they big boys?
Well, yes, they were bigger than us, you know.
And the average size were bigger than us.
From Chatton, they were, East End, you know.